One of my favorite canonical
experiences.
>> I can't. I just I can't.
>> Does not have an entry.
>> Wow.
>> For our deity, Roberta Flack, our
priestess of quiet.
>> This is what the kids would call
triggering. [laughter]
Triggering.
>> I'm Wesley Morris and this is Cannonball
[music] today. Struming my pain with his
fingers. That was bad. I have a kind of
practice around this time of year of
paying my respects to the people in my
life who won't be coming [music] with us
into the following year. Some of those
people I knew. Some of those people did
work that I knew. And part of paying my
respects to those people, the artists I
love, part of mourning them, is to
celebrate what they made. This year, I
could have easily devoted entire
episodes to giants [music] in their
field. It would have been cool, for
instance, to do a whole Frank Garry
episode where we just tour the buildings
he designed and talk about what was so
cool and controversial about them. David
Lynch's movies probably each need their
own individual episode.
>> Film is the thing. The film is the
thing.
>> Diane Katon, what a life. I mean, what a
career. But I think it [music] would
have been really fun to try to balance
the meaning of that career on I'm going
to say it. Baby Boom. Are you telling me
that I inherited a baby from a cousin I
haven't seen since 1954?
No. I know. No way. Uh-uh.
>> Rob Reiner. Oh my god. I mean, look, he
may not have made the best movies, but
he'd certainly made some of your
favorite ones. And just his work on All
in the Family, just playing Meatthead
[music] Mike Stick. That would have been
really fun.
>> Your way. With a sock on each foot, my
feet would get wet. My way. With a sock
and a shoe on one foot, I could hop
around and stay dry.
I would have loved to have talked about
how Jean Hackman might have been the
coolest movie star that we don't talk
about as being one of the coolest movie
stars. And maybe the way to do that
would have been by talking about the
French connection.
>> All right, Popeye's here. Get your hands
on your head. GET OFF THE BARN. GET ON
the wall.
>> I had this fantasy of [music] doing a
double Brian Wilson and Sly Stone
episode because actually those two guys
have a lot in common both musically and
professionally.
And then there were all the artists who
weren't household names but loomed large
at least for me. Folks like Malcolm
Jamal Warner who played Theo on the
Cosby Show.
>> What is this?
>> Edmmond White. He died in January. And I
spent the year rereading and
reappraising his writing because so many
other writers I like loved him. One of
the great things about America that
doesn't really exist in continental
Europe uh is the Open Stack Library.
>> I did the same thing for Jack Danette,
but for alltime great jazz drum,
but of all the people we lost in 2025,
all the artists, I went with Robera
Flack. I went with Robera Flack because
I find her musicianship powerful. She
was 88 when she died in February. And
there are a dozen ways of appreciating
the music she made. But I want to think
about the quiet [music] she kept. You
could set up a home in that quiet. You
could plot revolution by it. You could
hear yourself think. You could feel her
thinking. This is a woman who knew what
to do with a rest. Now [music] in music,
a rest is just a silent pause between
notes. Lots of pop songs use them, but
in the 1970s, Roberta Flax were newly
compelling. [music]
The rest is the secret ingredient of one
of her signature hits.
[singing]
>> Killing me softly with his song begins
with her performing the entire chorus
joined hauntingly by herself. She's up
close to [music] the microphone at first
and then like moonlight spreading across
a bed quilt, in come the other Robertas
from a chamber. But the rest of the rest
[singing]
[music]
to have that tiny break follow such a
celestial opening. You almost got to
stop and ask, did God take her? Did her
heart actually break? But then then
comes the lilting and some triangle and
a base that clusters and supports like a
pillow or a [music] floor while Robera
Flack backs up and explains what
happened with her and the song that
almost killed her. [music] And now we
the listener become her angels too. As
far as I'm concerned, all of that beauty
and sympathy that's set up by a rest.
And if I was going to spend some time
thinking about Robera Flack, I knew my
friend Daphne Brooks was the person to
pull up a chair with me. So I asked
Daffhany to put her headphones on and
come talk to me [music] about the
meaning of Robera's music. Daphne is a
professor at Yale University. She
teaches a blockbuster class on Beyonce.
and she's also a writer and a soulful
critic and the author of the invaluable
liner notes for the revolution, the
intellectual life of black feminist
sound. Deafany, thanks for coming.
>> I wouldn't want to be anywhere else.
>> Well, thanks for coming.
>> I appreciate that.
>> Absolutely.
>> I'm curious, Deafany, when did Roberta
Flax music come into your life? Like,
when did she happen to you? I don't have
a memory of when I first heard Robera
Flack. She was just always there like
the sun and the moon and the sky
>> atmosphere. It was all about it. She was
the atmosphere of my San Francisco Bay
area early 70s childhood along with
Sesame Street and
our Black Power Folk choir. M
>> I mean I feel like I'm in a therapy
session because I'm I'm piecing together
a lot of stuff here.
>> Mhm. Mhm.
>> And so Robera Flack is being played
especially by my teenage sister. Um
we're also hearing her on the beloved
Bay Area radio station KS.
>> Um we're hearing her on Soul Train. But
for me, my memories of my first
encounter with her, not only her voice,
but especially killing me softly, which
is, you know, the my first Robera Flack
experience like many many people's. And
the thing that was arresting about it as
a six, sevenyear-old child was that I
was hearing a black woman using words
like killing and pain.
>> Mhm. Killing me softly wasn't scary, but
it was such a rupture in the the kind
of, you know, pop music fabric of top
40. So, it was just it was a
distinctiveness. It was a
distinctiveness in terms of affect. It
was a distinctiveness in terms of
lyricism. And I mean, we can talk all
about sonic arrangement and
instrumentality just being very
distinct. Carol King was very much
>> coming out of my sister's bedroom at
that time
>> and there were some things that I was
hearing that felt conversant with Carol
King but also incredibly distinct.
>> So those are my early memories of
Robera.
>> Well, I mean I will just say that if
you're born after 1975
um and you don't experience her as part
of your popular music diet, she's still
in there anyway. Yeah,
>> everybody knows Killing Me Softly even
before the Fuji's cover it.
[singing]
>> It is just a song that you could not
escape because it was just everywhere.
But she was still making music when I
was a kid and this was at an interesting
time for music television because
all they did was play videos, [laughter]
>> right? and BET and VH1
love them some Oasis. Not the band,
[laughter] but Roberto Flack's album
from 1988.
>> Yeah.
[music]
>> I was just like, "Oh, well, that's what
she looks like, huh?
There she is." The face on on album
covers that I can kind of see. But I
just remember being taken by the
strength of her voice.
>> Yes.
>> And you know the other thing about her
that was fascinating to me is that she
wasn't cool is kind of not right but by
the time 1987 1988 roll around there's a
like large window of R&B that has gone
to outer space. She wasn't contemplating
life beyond this planet. She wasn't
trying to shake your ass
and she was concerned with matters of
the earth. She's like, "I can't. Y'all
can leave if you want to. I understand
why you're going. Earth and [laughter]
wind and fires,
[singing]
>> Mr. Clinton. George
but I'm going to stay here in this
little oasis that I have built and enjoy
what this is. And I just really kind of
responded to that. It's not like the
music she was making that my parents
were listening to is not little kids
music.
>> This is what the scholar another scholar
Mark Anthony Neil wrote beautifully
about Roberto Fleck in the early as you
know being one of those figures we think
of as making grown ass woman's music.
Yes. Growing and sexy, you know.
>> All right. So, I gave you a little
homework assignment related to Robera
Flag. I gave myself one, too. We're
going to pick two songs
>> and just talk about what they're doing
and maybe what they stand in for, what
they mean, why you love it. And I'm
going to ask you to go first.
>> Oh, okay.
>> What is the first of your two songs? Cuz
I, you know, I don't know what you
brought. The first pick is the first
time ever I saw your face.
>> Okay. I I'm heartened and surprised.
>> Oh, surprised.
>> Well, listen, I you know, I'm usually
Captain Obvious here, but I know if you
picked it, you got something deep to say
about it. [laughter] So, let's go. I
should say this is her first big hit.
Came out in 71, though. Let's listen to
it. First of all,
[music]
>> I saw [music] your face.
>> I mean, just the smokiness of her voice.
>> Oh, smokiness.
>> That tambber. I mean, it's coral
and gospel.
>> It's also not entirely of the earth,
Wesley.
>> All right, fine, Dafany. It's true.
You're right. [laughter] You're right.
But it's not outer space either.
>> No, no, no, no.
>> But it is it is ethereal. It's ethereal.
>> It's ethereal. I mean, that is a word
that's used a lot and a accurately so to
describe
>> Robera Flax work. I mean, I, you know,
I'm glad that you mentioned her being
Earthbound. I kind of think of what she
was doing a little bit differently. Um,
but certainly kind of parallel to
afroofuturism. [singing]
>> You know, there's there's a line from
Lauren Hill's rapturous eulogy which he
delivered at Roberto Flax memorial
service um that just, you know, I felt
like encapsulated
one of the many crucial elements of
Robera Flack's multi-dimensional genius.
So she has this line, M. Hill does,
where she says, quote, "She wrote our
stories in forms the established
authorities of the time could not deny.
Compositions wrapped with graceful,
flexible forms and nuances
that would not nor could not be
dismissed."
>> End quote. [sighs and gasps]
>> Okay. Yeah. And that for me, right, that
for me is the story of the mainstream
breakthrough success of the first time I
ever saw your face. Right.
>> Yes.
>> Cuz think of those lyrics. But the sun
[singing]
[music]
rose in your eyes.
I thought the sun rose in your eyes
[music]
and the moon and the stars were the
gifts you gave to the dark and the
endless skies, my love.
>> So black love rendered as a thing of the
cosmos,
>> the sun rose in your eyes, the moon and
the stars, right? Yes.
>> So to convey to the unknowing
to get let's just be generous and say
the unknowing to convey to the unknowing
that black love
that the wholeness of our being is
synonymous with the universe
>> is it's right it's both equal to the
scale of the universe and inextricably
tied to the light of the universe.
>> I mean I'm glad you chose this song
actually because it gives us an
opportunity to talk about what made it
famous. Oh, right. That part. [laughter]
Right. [laughter]
So, we have we have Mr. Clint Eastwood.
Yes.
>> This song appears in a movie, a big hit
in 1971. Clint Eastwood's other big hit
after Dirty Harry.
>> Yeah.
>> Play Misty for me. And I want you to
imagine being a ticket buying movie goer
in 1971.
You went to see Play Misty for me
because this was your trailer.
>> Clint Eastwood. An invitation to terror.
[screaming]
>> You ever find yourself
being completely smothered by somebody?
>> This is a movie about Clint Eastwood
being stalked by a woman who will not
leave him alone. People are like, "I'm
going to go see this white black
exploitation movie is what I'mma go
see."
>> Right. Exactly. [laughter]
>> But then they get to the movies
and Mr. Clint
>> is playing
the first time ever I saw your face in
its entirety as these two like build
their courtship together.
>> She is the mattress upon which this love
is made. Roberto Fleck.
>> And you know, Deafany,
>> this is typically how black people are
used in all kinds of American movies
with respect to white people having sex.
>> Tell it, Wesley. When white sexuality
needs a an expressive lubricant, it is
usually the black voice or the black
body, if we're talking about ghost,
>> um that is supplying the connection,
right? Like
>> yeah, the medium literally and
figuratively. Mhm.
>> The medium in Ghost of course being
Whoopy Goldberg. She plays the psychic
that Patrick jumps into to have a little
thing with Dememore. But anyway, that
song as used in Play Misty for me, an
enormous hit for Clint Eastwood and
Jessica Walter who plays the the
stalker,
>> makes that song very popular.
>> That's just the be that's that's the
beginning of Roberto Flack's career as a
popular musician. Clint Eastwood hears
that song on the radio and then, you
know, contacts Roberto Flack and still
confounding as to why he thought that
this was the song for that particular
film.
>> I don't know. It does speak though to
the everybodyess
of her of her voice.
>> Yes.
>> All right. Uh, you chose the first time
ever I saw your face. I am going to go
with, we were talking about covers. I'm
going to go with a cover of the BG's to
love somebody.
>> Jesus Christ.
>> We are both [music] making a little
stank face right now because
>> Mhm. [laughter]
>> Cuz you forget Roberta could do this.
>> Exactly. [crying] Exactly. What I love
about this song is it's another example
of her taking her time.
>> And in taking her time, she is thinking
about how to repossess a song.
>> Yes. Yes. Great point. Absolutely.
>> It's a march.
Um it's it's processional. It is the
blues and she means it. That's the thing
about Roberta singing anything is that
you what you feel is what she means you
to feel.
>> Yes.
>> And I just love how meant this song is
and just sexy. It's sexy. Our We both
pulled our mouths down while we were
[laughter] listening to it.
>> Yeah. I mean I think people don't
because of the massive
impact of Killing Me Softly
and First Time I Ever Saw Your Face. I
think that there is a way that
she has sometimes sometimes been
scripted as an as earth mama,
>> which I think is perfectly fine.
>> Um, but she contains the multitudes
and you know, I think there was such an
eloquence and sophistication to her
sensuality that it could
>> move in a variety of different
directions.
>> Also should just say that's from
Quietfire from 1971. I think that's the
third album. Um, your turn. What you
got?
>> I wanted to share Gone Away.
>> Oh, wow.
>> It's a cover of um Donnie Hathaway.
Donnie. It's a Donnie Hathaway song. It
sounds so much like a Donnie Hathaway
song,
>> right? Donnie Hathaway being of course
the singer and songwriter. And um
Roberto Flack made a lot of music with
this man and some of her most popular
music was with Donnie Hathaway and he
wrote this song.
Yet I believe
sometimes [singing and music]
I've lost you, baby. I've lost you,
baby.
And you are gone. [music]
>> We're just opening up the heavens.
>> Yeah. And I do feel like we can hear in
this moment something that we also hear,
you know, in the famous wordless
improvisational run that carries us
towards the end of Killing Me Softly.
It's about a kind of
going beyond words. Words don't go
there. It's a collective reminder of,
you know, how much the choir and the
coral and the collective and
collaboration,
especially with her beloved Donnie
Hathaway, her her great legendary
musical partner. Um, how much that meant
to her and I hear all of that in those
last that last minute and a half of Gone
Away.
>> Well, because you know our brains are in
sync today. My second song, the fourth
of our fourth songs, it's a Donnie
Hathaway, Robera Fleck duet.
>> Yes.
>> So many of Robera's hits, as we kind of
discussed already, were with Donnie
Hathaway, who died in 1979.
>> 79.
>> Um, and what I really love about the two
of them together, Donnie Hathaway and
Robera Flack, is that
>> she lets him do whatever he wants. And
there's just like a comfort
that she has when she sings. Not a
complacency.
>> Yes.
>> But she knows what he can do as a singer
and she knows what she can do as a
singer. And these two musicians are just
in complete
harmonic
synergy. Um so this is one of their
signatures. Be real black for me.
[music]
[singing]
have to change a thing.
No one knows
the love.
>> Oh god, I'm getting chills just hearing
them together. Like the harmony.
[laughter]
>> The harmonies are crazy. [music]
[singing]
>> They are Nah's children. They are Nah's
children.
>> The great Nina Simone. Yes.
>> To be young, gifted, and black.
>> Yes. 100%. I think that the the beauty
of a song like this, which is, you know,
has arrived, you know, this is on their
first album together,
um,
>> and I think it's 1972 near the height of
Black Power after the, you know, the
demise of the civil rights movement. Not
a not a great time
to be thinking about what the future
looks like for black people. So, we are
very much in our present. And it just
this is such a dare in a lot of ways. I
mean it's a it's a comfort that they're
singing about, right? Like
>> you don't have to be afraid to be your
full black self with me.
>> Yes.
>> I mean it's but like it the thing that's
so great about Robera Flack and this is
true for Donnie Hathaway too. Um but
it's it's differently true for I think
for women to express themselves in this
way which is to simultaneously
possess sensuality
to sing about sex
>> while also understanding the politics of
what it means to be singing that way in
the first place
>> in the public domain.
>> In the public domain.
>> And to
[sighs] sound like you enjoy it.
[laughter]
>> Yes.
>> Like you know what pleasure.
>> Yeah. M
>> before we go, I'm still thinking about
what it means that we have this woman in
our lives, that we have this woman's
music in our lives, and I want to think
about what [sighs] her legacy is. Um,
I'm not crazy about that word,
>> but I do want to present something to
you.
>> And you're going to laugh at me because
I feel like one aspect of this
relationship is me being surprised by
things that
>> you woke up knowing and [laughter]
I
>> You mean being old?
>> No. No. you being wise [laughter]
and a person of the world, which I
always kind of think I'm a little bit
wise and a little bit of person of the
world. [laughter] And then I get little
reality checks like the one I'm about to
present to you. So, I'm holding in my
hands my trusty Rolling Stone album
guide, which is now in its
>> 2004 edition. And I sent you two
pictures from pages uh 299 in this great
book.
>> Yeah.
>> To 300.
>> And the entry going from 299 begins with
the five satins, the great five satins.
>> And it ends on page 300 with the
flamingos. Between those two acts is the
flaming lips. Now you do some math on
who should be whose page that ought to
be,
>> but it is not.
>> I can't. I just I can't.
>> This is what the kids would call
triggering.
>> One of my favorite
>> canonical experiences
[screaming]
>> does not have an entry for our deity,
our priestess.
>> No entry, no induction in the rock hall,
not even a nominee. was never on the
ballot. Never appeared on
>> the ballot.
>> But Donnie Hathaway has an entry.
>> Yes. [laughter] Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow.
>> And the only time Flack's name appears
in this book
is conjoined to Mr. Hathaway. So, I just
want to start there. This this is the
2004 edition. I strongly suspect that a
future edition will definitely have a
page for Miss Flack. They've been going
through through some cha changes.
>> Yes. I just want to think about what
does that what does that say to you?
Because I was surprised her obituary ran
on the front page of the New York Times
>> and I don't know in 2004 would she have
been on the front page?
>> No. No.
>> Something has happened in our
reestimation of this person.
>> Yeah.
>> But nothing about her work changed.
>> No.
>> So it's us. Well, not us because I'd
have put her in.
>> Thank God. [laughter]
>> Right. Right. But but the pop public
changed obviously, you know, the the
move to identify the biases that are
historically inherent in rock music
criticism and what gets valued and
devalued, all of that. But also, I
think, you know, our 21st century
um deeply contested era of Black Lives
Matter
um and a an unprecedented
um cultural wave of reclaiming our
formidable
black intellectuals
and grassroots activists who were
absolutely uncompromised. ing and I'm
thinking of course of Nina and also
James Baldwin and so you would put
Roberta in the room with them right
>> 100%. But I mean also to bring it back
full circle, very much a part of this
cultural phenomenon that often goes
unrecognized with regards [music] to
black quiet, you know, turning within.
And this is another form of resistance.
And this is, if I may, a point that
Lauren Hill makes um so beautifully, so
stirringly [music]
at um at the at the memorial service.
She didn't just write about the beauty.
She was the beauty.
She didn't just write about resistance.
Her existence was a form of resistance.
She wrote our stories.
She wrote our stories in forms the
established authorities of the time
could not deny.
>> I'm still little Daphne Brooks in 1972,
1973, 1974.
and really
feeling
the freedom of what my parents'
generation
gave to us and bequeathed to us through
this music and what it was like to wear
dashiki and go to our folk choir with
Mr. Fin L who changed his name to
brother Larry Love [laughter] and to
find I God bless him but you know we
were we were together in this space and
feeling just really safe and that's how
I feel and how I felt when I listened to
Robera Flack and that is music that we
have been gifted with and had the
privilege to fall in love with.
>> That's that's where I am. That's where
that's where I am.
>> Daffany Brooks, thanks for coming to do
this.
>> Wesley Morris, thank you for having me.
>> And thank you, Miss Robera Flack, for
everything.